Graph reference updates for Cypher 25 / Neo4j 2025.06 (#2443)
neo4j/docs-operations: modules/ROOT/pages/database-administration/aliases/manage-aliases-composite-databases.adoc

Dots in alias names are ambiguous.
They could either be interpreted as part of the name itself, or as the dot that separates a composite namespace from the alias name.

=== Conflicting names
Before Neo4j 2025.06 it was possible to create conflicting aliases such as the constituent alias `flowers` within the composite database `garden` as well as the non-composite local alias `garden.flowers`.
Both of these would be referred to by the same name `garden.flowers`.

Neo4j 2025.06 ensures that no such conflicts exist and will throw an exception when attempting to create a new alias with the same name as an existing alias.

[.tabbed-example]
=====
[role=include-with-cypher-5]
======
Creating a regular alias with the same name as an existing composite constituent is disallowed:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CYPHER 5 CREATE COMPOSITE DATABASE `garden`
CYPHER 5 CREATE ALIAS `garden`.`flowers` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`
CYPHER 5 CREATE ALIAS `garden.flowers` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`
----

.Error message
[source, output, role="noheader"]
----
Failed to create the specified database alias 'garden.flowers': Database name or alias already exists.
----

======

> [role=include-with-cypher-25 label--new-2025.06]

Reviewer: Yes, exactly what I was thinking. As I anyway had the 5.26 branch checked out for the deprecation backporting I tested it out and the first example works differently on 5.26 and the second the same just as you wrote here

======

Creating a regular alias with the same name as an existing composite constituent is disallowed.

> The Cypher 25 syntax makes no distinction between the names to clarify that they are considered equivalent.

Author: ```suggestion
In Cypher 25 it is clear that the two names are considered the same, since the parts are not quoted separately as they would be in Cypher 5.
```

> The Cypher 25 syntax makes no distinction between the names to clarify that they are considered equivalent.

Reviewer: Yes that is better I think 👍

----

======

[role=include-with-cypher-25 label--new-2025.06]
======

Creating a composite constituent with the same name as an existing non-composite alias is disallowed.
This example scenario is prevented already on the second line, thus the constituent on the third line cannot be created.
The Cypher 25 syntax makes no distinction between the names to clarify that they are considered equivalent.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CYPHER 25 CREATE ALIAS `garden.flowers` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`
CYPHER 25 CREATE COMPOSITE DATABASE `garden`
CYPHER 25 CREATE ALIAS `garden.flowers` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`
----

.Error message
[source, output, role="noheader"]
----
Cannot create database 'garden' because another database 'garden.flowers' exists with an ambiguous name.
----
======
=====

Creating a composite constituent with the same name as an existing non-composite alias is disallowed:

=== Cypher 25 specific behaviour
==== Accessing an existing alias with dots

Cypher 25 relies on the guarantee that no conflicting names are allowed in Neo4j 2025.06 and later.
The following queries all act on the same alias, regardless if that alias is a composite constituent or not.

> The special quoting of separate name parts that was necessary in Cypher 5 is not necessary / permitted in Cypher 25.

Author: Good point

Somebody good at English please tell me if `not this nor that` is correct, feels like it needs to be `neither this nor that`. Google isn't helping me prove my point though 😞

----

[[alias-management-escaping]]
== Database alias names that contain dots

Naming database aliases in composite databases follows the same rule as xref:database-administration/aliases/naming-aliases.adoc[naming aliases for standard databases].
However, when it comes to escaping names using backticks, there are some additional things to consider:

Dots in alias names are ambiguous.
They could either be interpreted as part of the name itself, or as the dot that separates a composite namespace from the alias name.

=== Conflicting names
Before Neo4j 2025.06, it was possible to create conflicting aliases such as the constituent alias `flowers` within the composite database `garden` as well as the non-composite local alias `garden.flowers`.
Both of these would be referred to by the same name `garden.flowers`.

Neo4j 2025.06 and later versions ensure that no such conflicts exist and will throw an exception when attempting to create a new alias with the same name as an existing alias.

[.tabbed-example]
=====

> [role=include-with-cypher-5 label--new-2025.06]

Author: This behaviour is new in 2025.06, previously this would not lead to an error

======
Creating a regular alias with the same name as an existing composite constituent is disallowed:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CYPHER 5 CREATE COMPOSITE DATABASE `garden`
CYPHER 5 CREATE ALIAS `garden`.`flowers` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`
CYPHER 5 CREATE ALIAS `garden.flowers` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`
----

.Error message
[source, output, role="noheader"]
----
Failed to create the specified database alias 'garden.flowers': Database name or alias already exists.
----

======

> [role=include-with-cypher-25 label--new-2025.06]

Author: This is new in 2025.06 because Cypher 25 didn't exist before then

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CYPHER 25 CREATE COMPOSITE DATABASE `garden`
CYPHER 25 CREATE ALIAS `garden.flowers` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`
CYPHER 25 CREATE ALIAS `garden.flowers` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`
----

.Error message
[source, output, role="noheader"]
----
Failed to create the specified database alias 'garden.flowers': Database name or alias already exists.
----
======
=====

[.tabbed-example]
=====
[role=include-with-cypher-5]
======
Creating a composite constituent with the same name as an existing non-composite alias is disallowed. This example scenario is prevented already on the second line, thus the constituent on the third line cannot be created.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CYPHER 5 CREATE ALIAS `garden.flowers` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`
CYPHER 5 CREATE COMPOSITE DATABASE `garden`
CYPHER 5 CREATE ALIAS `garden`.`flowers` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`
----

.Error message
[source, output, role="noheader"]
----
Cannot create database 'garden' because another database 'garden.flowers' exists with an ambiguous name.
----

======

> [role=include-with-cypher-25 label--new-2025.06]

Reviewer 2: Yes, the whole section is labeled. See above:

```
[role=label--new-2025.06]
=== Conflicting names
```

=====
[role=include-with-cypher-5]
======
Creating a regular alias with the same name as an existing composite constituent is disallowed:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CYPHER 5 CREATE COMPOSITE DATABASE `garden`
CYPHER 5 CREATE ALIAS `garden`.`flowers` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`
CYPHER 5 CREATE ALIAS `garden.flowers` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`
----

.Error message
[source, output, role="noheader"]
----
Failed to create the specified database alias 'garden.flowers': Database name or alias already exists.
----
The exception has the GQLSTATUS code link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/status-codes/current/errors/gql-errors/42001[42001 - invalid syntax] with the cause link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/status-codes/current/errors/gql-errors/42N11[42N11 - graph reference already exists].

======

[role=include-with-cypher-25]
======

Creating a regular alias with the same name as an existing composite constituent is disallowed.
In Cypher 25, the two names are considered the same since the parts are not quoted separately as they would be in Cypher 5.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CYPHER 25 CREATE COMPOSITE DATABASE `garden`
CYPHER 25 CREATE ALIAS `garden.flowers` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`

> CYPHER 25 CREATE ALIAS `garden.flowers` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`

Reviewer 3: shouldn't one of these be un escaped to show some difference in the commands?

Reviewer 3: Sure, @l-heemann can confirm if that is something we want to update when he gets back :P

Author: Yes this is intentional to show the difference between Cypher 5 and 25 (by toggling the tabbed view back and forth)

Reviewer 3: But having both the CYPHER 25 commands be identical feels weird to me... if I did that in Cypher 5 I would fail on it trying to create the same thing twice as well... so why not have one ` garden.flowers ` (unescaped) and one ``` `garden.flowers` ``` (escaped together) in the Cypher 25 example 🤔 wouldn't that be closer to the commands for Cypher 5 (that does differ in that one is escaped together and one separately)

.Parameters
[source, javascript]
----
{
  "name": "my.garden.beautiful.flowers"
}
----
.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CYPHER 25 ALTER ALIAS `my.garden.beautiful.flowers` SET DATABASE PROPERTIES { perennial: true }
CYPHER 25 ALTER ALIAS $name SET DATABASE PROPERTIES { perennial: true }
CYPHER 25 USE `my.garden.beautiful.flowers` RETURN 1
----

==== Creating a new alias with dots

During `CREATE`, Cypher 25 splits the given name on each dot, left to right, and checks if a corresponding composite database exists.
If no composite database is found, Cypher25 falls back to creating a regular non-composite alias.

For example:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CYPHER 25 CREATE COMPOSITE DATABASE `my.garden`
CYPHER 25 CREATE ALIAS `my.garden.beautiful.flowers` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`
----

The query attempts to create the following aliases in the given order:

. Constituent alias `garden.beautiful.flowers` within composite database `my`.
. Constituent alias `beautiful.flowers` within composite database `my.garden`.
. Constituent alias `flowers` within composite database `my.garden.beautiful`.
. Regular non-composite alias `my.garden.beautiful.flowers`.

> .Query

Reviewer 2: Ah, this query needs to go.

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-skip]
----
CYPHER 5 CREATE ALIAS `my.alias.with.dots` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`
----

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-skip]
----
CYPHER 5 CREATE ALIAS `my.composite.database.with.dots`.`my.other.alias.with.dots` FOR DATABASE `northwind-graph`
----

==== Single dots and local database aliases
[NOTE]
====

> As of Neo4j 2025.06, this feature is no longer deprecated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As of Neo4j 2025.06, this feature is no longer deprecated.
====
```
